Let's talk about arrays.
So we've talked a little
bit about object types.
Obviously, arrays are the other main
type of collection that we work with
in JavaScript.
And sort of key value storage
we have positional storage.
So, typically, for at least simple
types of arrays, all we have
to do is add a pair of square brackets
after the type of the member of the array.
So this would be an array of strings.
And you see the inference works here,
just as we would hope where we don't have
to explicitly write a type annotation.
TypeScript understands what's going on.
We could use our object type here as
well to say we have an array of cars and
we could start with one car in there.
So this you can think of it as
like this is just as much a type,
as the word string is a type and
it can be used in all the same places.
So that's simple arrays.
Let's talk about tuples.
So tuples are, I mean,
you could have used tuples in
regular JavaScript if you wanted to.
There's no special treatment.
It's more like just a pattern.
Where you have some meaning of positional
ordering of different pieces of data.
So if we wanted to store our 2002,
Toyota Corolla,
we could just have a convention that says,
the first member the first
element of the tuple is the year followed
by the make, followed by the model.
So we could store it like this.
And then this makes destructured
assignment really nice because we can
then pull out the individual little
parts of this compound value.
And do something interesting
with your making model.
So, unfortunately, inference is
not going to be our friend here.
And again, we're back to
the theme of TypeScript making.
We're trying to make a reasonable and
safe assumption,
that will stay out of our
way most of the time.
And in this case, it's decided that
what we're trying to do is create
a mixed array of arbitrary length that
contains some mix of strings and numbers.
And that's gonna be a problem for us, why?
Well we could add an additional element,
right?
Like this is a sedan versus a coupe.
The year is not in the right place, right?
The year should be the first element and
this is in the second position here.
So it's just not describing things
as tightly as we really want.
I invite you to think about this question.
What do you want most of the time?
So sometimes we return an array
that has two things in it and
it's always two things and
there's always a number and then a string.
And other times we use
arrays of arbitrary length.
So show of hands, who uses arrays as
like arbitrary length collections
more often than like,
just a pair of things?
Like I know I do.
And in the chat,
you can just type y or n, yes or no.
Yeah, I see some hands up.
So TypeScript is designing around this.
They don't want to mess with
your regular array use case.
And this is not a big problem, but all
it means is that you're going to have to
explicitly state when you intend for
an array to be treated as a tuple.
And you're gonna just need to define
a type annotation in that case.
Again, it's running with
the theme of type strip trying to
stay out of your way while
providing you with safety.
And here is what that
tuple might look like.
So within the square brackets,
we're simply indicating
with each position what type of
value we expect to find there.
In this case, we're being shown that or
being alerted to the fact that two things
seem to be out of place, TypeScripts,
not happy with the first or
the second element here.
And that's because they need to be
switched in terms of position and
then here we're seeing that source has
4 elements, the target only allows 3.
It's basically saying the right hand
side has 4 things on the left hand side,
you have my car and
you told me I should have 3 things.
Therefore I object, right?
So this is how you define tuples.
They're, really useful in cases where
you want to return multiple things.
But maybe it's not a type that's so
formalized that you wanna store things
under property keys, like often,
maybe for form validation case, right?
I don't want to throw errors.
I kind of want to return errors.
I'll return a tuple that
has in the first position,
a string that's like success or okay.
And then data, or
the first position it'll be like error and
then followed by the error.
But this is a pattern you see often
in languages like Python or Elixir.
Where you return these things?
So, you do want to be careful here and
TypeScript 4.3 it's the latest release.
So I'm leaving this immortalizing
this comment saying that,
something might happen in the future,
but today there are limitations.
There is not a whole lot of support for
stopping you from treating
this like an array.
So in this case,
you can see that during assignment,
we get the error messages
we would hope to get.
But in this case, you can see that
we start with a two element tuple.
We can push the third one in,
we can pop them all out and
TypeScript is not going to stop
us from doing anything here.
I can give you a hypothesis as to
why TypeScript letting us do this.
And it's because there is no
type equivalence check on
num pair that happens when
we invoke methods on it.
There's no concept in TypeScript yet
of like, I'm calling this thing push.
Therefore, the thing that I was
invoking it on, like numb pair,
it's type should change.
There's no concept like
that in the language yet.
So you have to be aware that you only
get that validation on assignment and
you can still shoot yourself in
the foot by messing with your
tuple using push and pop.
And Luis points out there's a proposal for
real records and tuples and JS.
That's, great.
There are a lot of proposals for
things in JS.
So I wouldn't wanna represent that
this is coming or even likely,
until these proposals advance
to like at least stage three.
Seems like the kind of thing that might
work though cuz it's to be reasonably
performant.
All right, and Niche has a question
that I need to read for a moment.
Okay, I'm just gonna sort of
boil that question down and
Niche asks a question about is
the JavaScript community, and
really it's like TC 39, the committee
that decides what JavaScript is.
Are they going to make JavaScript
a statically typed language?
I think it's extremely unlikely.
I'm gonna say less than 1% chance,
probably much less.
And the reason is, this works pretty well,
having sort of JavaScript
be a compiled target.
Now, what's more likely to happen is
something around WebAssembly where
you have other typed languages that
compile out to WebAssembly bundle.
And maybe that includes
some runtime type checking.
But remember this runtime type
checking does not come for free.
And we still have a lot of
JavaScript to run in the world.
So I do not expect types to be
added to JavaScript directly.
But that shouldn't get in your
way because you can use this and
treat JavaScript as a build target.